```@meta
CurrentModule = NemoMod
```
# [Calculating selected years](@id selected_years)

Whether optimizing with [perfect or limited foresight](@ref foresight), you can restrict scenario calculations in NEMO to certain [years](@ref year) only. To do so, specify a limited set of years in the `calcyears` argument for [`calculatescenario`](@ref scenario_calc) (or the `calcyears` key in your model's [NEMO configuration file](@ref configuration_file)). This ensures that only those years are considered in the scenario's optimization problem. In particular, the problem's objective is to minimize discounted costs in those years. Note that if you don't supply a value for `calcyears`, all years in the scenario database are included in the optimization.

Calculating selected years offers a way quickly to generate results from large, complex models. While the results may not be identical to what you would get if you calculated all years, NEMO takes several steps to ensure they are a reasonable approximation. Specifically, when calculating selected years, NEMO:

* Calculates discounted investment costs for [technologies](@ref technology) and [storage](@ref storage) by distributing the costs over modeled (selected) and non-modeled years. Each modeled year is taken as the endpoint of an interval that starts after the prior modeled year (or at the beginning of the first year in the scenario database [**the first scenario year**], if there is no prior modeled year). For discounting purposes, investment costs incurred in a modeled year are assumed to be spread equally over the year's interval. NEMO's output [variables](@ref variables) for discounted technology and storage investment costs ([`vdiscountedcapitalinvestment`](@ref vdiscountedcapitalinvestment) and [`vdiscountedcapitalinvestmentstorage`](@ref vdiscountedcapitalinvestmentstorage)) reflect this adjustment.

* Calculates discounted [transmission](@ref transmissionline) investment costs in the same way as discounted technology/storage investment costs if the `continuoustransmission` argument for `calculatescenario` is `true`. In this case, the output variable [`vdiscountedcapitalinvestmenttransmission`](@ref vdiscountedcapitalinvestmenttransmission) includes the adjustment.

* Estimates discounted operation and maintenance costs for technologies in non-modeled years. Fixed costs are estimated by assuming that capacity evolves in a linear fashion between modeled years (or, if a modeled year's interval begins with the first scenario year, that there is a linear change from the [residual capacity](@ref ResidualCapacity) in that year to the capacity in the modeled year). Variable costs are computed by assuming activity changes in a linear fashion between modeled years (or, if a modeled year's interval begins with the first scenario year, that the activity in the modeled year recurs in other years in the interval). Fixed and variable costs are also assumed to remain constant between the last modeled year and the last year in the scenario database (**the last scenario year**). The output variable [`vdiscountedoperatingcost`](@ref vdiscountedoperatingcost) includes these adjustments.

* Similarly estimates discounted transmission operation and maintenance costs in non-modeled years. For exogenously specified lines (where `yconstruction` is defined), fixed costs in non-modeled years depend on whether the line exists in those years. For candidate lines NEMO may build endogenously (`yconstruction` is not provided), fixed costs in non-modeled years are contingent on `continuoustransmission`. If this argument is `true`, fixed costs are calculated by assuming that the fraction built of each line evolves linearly between modeled years (the fraction built at the start of the first scenario year is 0). If `continuoustransmission` is `false`, fixed costs are counted in non-modeled years if a line has previously been built. In both cases, fixed costs of candidate lines are assumed to remain constant between the last modeled year and the last scenario year. Variable costs in non-modeled years are estimated by assuming transmission activity changes in a linear fashion between modeled years (or, if a modeled year's interval begins with the first scenario year, that the activity in the modeled year also holds in other years in the interval). Variable transmission costs are presumed to remain constant between the last modeled year and the last scenario year. All of these adjustments are included in the output variable [`vdiscountedoperatingcosttransmission`](@ref vdiscountedoperatingcosttransmission).

* Estimates discounted technology emission penalties in non-modeled years. The penalties are computed by assuming that penalty amounts evolve linearly between modeled years (or, if a modeled year's interval begins with the first scenario year, that the penalty in the modeled year recurs in other years in the interval). For the period between the last modeled year and the last scenario year, penalties are assumed to remain constant. The output variable [`vdiscountedtechnologyemissionspenalty`](@ref vdiscountedtechnologyemissionspenalty) includes these adjustments.

All of these adjustments are also incorporated in NEMO's output variables that sum discounted costs: [`vtotaldiscountedcostbytechnology`](@ref vtotaldiscountedcostbytechnology), [`vtotaldiscountedstoragecost`](@ref vtotaldiscountedstoragecost), [`vtotaldiscountedtransmissioncostbyregion`](@ref vtotaldiscountedtransmissioncostbyregion), and [`vtotaldiscountedcost`](@ref vtotaldiscountedcost). Note that salvage values for storage, transmission, and technologies are still based on asset value remaining in the last scenario year, so calculating selected years does not alter how they are computed. Whether or not selected years are calculated, NEMO discounts all costs to the first scenario year.

NEMO also makes a few other changes when you restrict calculations to selected years:

* Annual capacity addition limits for technologies ([`TotalAnnualMaxCapacityInvestment`](@ref TotalAnnualMaxCapacityInvestment) and [`TotalAnnualMinCapacityInvestment`](@ref TotalAnnualMinCapacityInvestment)) and storage ([`TotalAnnualMaxCapacityInvestmentStorage`](@ref TotalAnnualMaxCapacityInvestmentStorage) and [`TotalAnnualMinCapacityInvestmentStorage`](@ref TotalAnnualMinCapacityInvestmentStorage)) are scaled up by multiplying them by the number of years in each modeled year's interval.

!!! tip
    If you calculate selected years, capacity additions in a modeled year are best construed as additions during the interval corresponding to the year. As noted above, each modeled year's interval begins with the year following the prior modeled year (or the first scenario year, if there is no prior modeled year) and ends with the modeled year. For example, if the first scenario year is 2020 and you calculate 2020, 2030, and 2040, the intervals are as follows: 2020, 2021-2030, and 2031-2040.

* Energy in storage is not transferred between non-contiguous modeled years (i.e., if there is a gap between modeled years). This restriction applies even if none of the net zero attributes of storage (`netzeroyear`, `netzerotg1`, and `netzerotg2`) is enabled.

* The [`StorageLevelStart`](@ref StorageLevelStart) parameter is interpreted as the fraction of exogenous storage capacity that is charged at the start of the first modeled year.

* Activity in modeled and non-modeled years is taken into account when determining compliance with model period technology activity limits ([`TotalTechnologyModelPeriodActivityUpperLimit`](@ref TotalTechnologyModelPeriodActivityUpperLimit) and [`TotalTechnologyModelPeriodActivityLowerLimit`](@ref TotalTechnologyModelPeriodActivityLowerLimit)). Activity in non-modeled years is estimated by assuming that: 1) activity is constant in all years from the first scenario year to the first modeled year; 2) activity grows linearly between modeled years; and 3) activity is constant in all years from the last modeled year to the last scenario year. The output variable [`vtotaltechnologymodelperiodactivity`](@ref vtotaltechnologymodelperiodactivity) includes activity in both modeled and non-modeled years.

* Emissions in modeled and non-modeled years are taken into account when determining compliance with model period emission limits ([`ModelPeriodEmissionLimit`](@ref ModelPeriodEmissionLimit)). Emissions in non-modeled years are estimated in the same way as activity in non-modeled years. The output variable [`vmodelperiodemissions`](@ref vmodelperiodemissions) includes emissions in both modeled and non-modeled years.

* The output variable [`vmodelperiodcostbyregion`](@ref vmodelperiodcostbyregion) includes results for modeled years only.

!!! note
    The changes and adjustments described above do not depend on whether you're conducting a perfect foresight or limited foresight optimization. In both cases, NEMO makes the changes/adjustments to account for non-modeled years. With limited foresight, some of the non-modeled years may be between the groups of years being optimized.

[^1]: `calcyears` also applies to [`writescenariomodel`](@ref).
